README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img
    src="./assets/images/logo.svg"
    alt="Neptune Logo"
    width="220"
  />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Neptune</b>
  <br />
  Example Elixir Cluster on K8s
</p>

![screenshot](./screenshot.png)

## Setup Instructions

## Set up the app for running it locally

```bash
mix setup
```

## Run locally

```bash
mix phx.server
```

You should now be able to visit the server in your browser on http://localhost:4000

## Run **Production** Release Locally

### Set environment variables
Make sure you have Direnv installed for this to work.

```bash
cp .envrc.example .envrc
```

Edit the `SECRET_KEY_BASE` to a stable value, which you can generate using `mix phx.gen.secret`. Here's a handy script

```bash
sed 's@SECRET_KEY_BASE=.*@SECRET_KEY_BASE='"$(mix phx.gen.secret)"'@' .envrc
```

Check that it changed, and then enable it with:

```bash
direnv allow
```

### Build the Production Release

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod mix release --overwrite
```

### Build Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t neptune .
```

### Run in Docker Container

This command will pass env vars from the terminal session to the container and will run it in daemon mode

```bash
docker run --rm -d -p $PORT:$PORT -e PORT -e SECRET_KEY_BASE -e DATABASE_URL --name neptune neptune
```

You should now be able to visit the server in your browser on http://localhost:4000

### Stop Docker Container

```bash
docker stop neptune
```

## Run more nodes

Make sure the `.hosts.erlang` file has the right hostname for your machine.

Get the hostname this way:

```bash
hostname
```

Run in two different terminals:

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod PORT=4000 iex --sname node4000 -S mix phx.server
```

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod PORT=4001 iex --sname node4001 -S mix phx.server
```

The nodes should automatically connect via libcluster :sparkles:

# Kubernetes
This app can be run locally using Minikube

## Setup
First set up the cluster:

```bash
minikube start -p neptune-mk -n 2
```

(this will create a 2 node cluster)

## Secrets
You will need to create a secrets file

```bash
kubectl create secret generic neptune-secret
```

And then edit it to include a few secrets:

```bash
kubectl edit secrets neptune-secret
```

It should look something like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  database_password: <base64 encoded password>
  database_url: <base64 encoded database url e.g. ecto://postgres:mysecretpassword@postgres-service/neptune_prod>
  secret_key_base: <base64 encoded generated secret e.g. from mix phx.gen.secret>
kind: Secret
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2022-06-17T04:08:33Z"
  name: neptune-secret
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: "27981"
  uid: b9d65217-4fa0-42a7-b230-b611de14ad10
type: Opaque
```

## Applying configurations

```bash
kubectl apply -f k8s
```

This should create all necessary pods and services

## Accessing the tunnel
To access the cluster you can use

```bash
minikube tunnel
```

Then to find the IP address of the cluster:

```bash
kubectl get pods -o wide
```

And look for the external IP of the neptune-service, which you can plug into your browser e.g. `http://10.106.243.99:4000`

## Connecting to Postgres DB

First list the pods to find the Cluster IP of the postgres service

```bash
kubectl get pods
```

```
NAME               TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
kubernetes         ClusterIP      10.96.0.1        <none>        443/TCP          27d
neptune-headless   ClusterIP      None             <none>        <none>           6s
neptune-service    LoadBalancer   10.99.44.84      10.99.44.84   4000:31793/TCP   6s
postgres-service   ClusterIP      10.110.129.226   <none>        5432/TCP         5s
```

Then use that IP to connect to the database via psql

```bash
psql -U postgres -h 10.110.129.226
```


# Deployment

## Semi-Auto

This project uses Pulumi to deploy the K8s cluster to DigitalOcean.

First install Pulumi on your machine, then cd into the `infra` directory and set all the required secrets for the stack (dev):

```bash
pulumi config set --secret digitalocean:token <DO_API_TOKEN>
pulumi config set domain example.com # make sure you have the nameservers pointed at digitalocean since this is how we manage the DNS
pulumi config set subdomain k8s # can be anything
pulumi config set --secret database_password <pass>
pulumi config set --secret database_url 'ecto://<user>:<pass>@postgres-service/neptune_prod'
pulumi config set --secret secret_key_base '<generate via mix phx.gen.secret>'
```

Then run

```bash
pulumi up
```

## Full Auto (Continuous Deployment + Preview Envs)

### Preview Envs

Every PR gets its own preview environment on an entirely separate cluster, which
is deployed to dedicated subdomain. This allows testing changes in isolation and
significantly streamlines the steps a developer has to make to get from code change to UAT and subsequently to production.

The subdomain is generated based on the branch name using
[codenamize.js](https://github.com/stemail23/codenamize-js). This allows using
any branch name including names that are not subdomain friendly such as
`feature/do-a-thing`.

The generated subdomain will look something like this
`http://vengeful-professor.console.lol`

### Production Deploy
Coming soon...!

# TODO
This project achieved its main goal of demonstrating how to create Preview Envs
for PRs such as the ones popularized by Heroku, Render, Netlify, Vercel etc... But do it with Kubernetes as part of the CI/CD workflow.

I intend to continue to iterate on this and make it a template for future
projects requiring hand rolled infrastructure (e.g. massive scale). Also this
serves as a great learning opportunity for Elixir clustering and work
distribution/state sharing in a cluster.

There are a few more optimizations I am still working on
## Must Have
- [ ] Production deploy to canonical domain console.lol
  - Currently production deploys are not automated via CD (but can be deployed
    from the commandline using Pulumi)

## Optimizations (Nice to have)
- [ ] Single staging cluster with namespaces for preview envs
  - Potentially save money (since each 2 node cluster is ~$24, not including
    load balancer and volumes)
  - Potentially speed up initial deploy time
  - Could be a rabbit hole though
- [ ] Use labels to trigger build on PRs (e.g. Deploy label)
  - [ ] label removal should destroy the environment
- [ ] Change the destroy env workflow to be triggered only by closed PRs (with
      the labels)
  - To avoid workflow failures when non PR branches are closed
- [ ] separate secrets for production and staging (perhaps use a stack file as a
      template so there's less to define and use the "copy from" flag when running
      `pulumi stack create`)
- [ ] break Pulumi file into smaller files
- [ ] attempt to re-use k8s yaml folder
  - [ ] will require passing the docker image tag as a variable
- [ ] automatically delete volumes for preview environments
  - the volumes are created by the stateful set automatically, but are not
    destroyed when the environment is spun down. Maybe there's a way to create
    the volume via Pulumi and attach it to the cluster — this way it will get
    deleted on destroy

## Learning opportunities
- [ ] Cluster Dynamic Supervisor with Horde
- [ ] Distributed Task Supervisor for spreading work across the cluster

Commit message:

docs: add TODO for SSL cert

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img
    src="./assets/images/logo.svg"
    alt="Neptune Logo"
    width="220"
  />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Neptune</b>
  <br />
  Example Elixir Cluster on K8s
</p>

![screenshot](./screenshot.png)

## Setup Instructions

## Set up the app for running it locally

```bash
mix setup
```

## Run locally

```bash
mix phx.server
```

You should now be able to visit the server in your browser on http://localhost:4000

## Run **Production** Release Locally

### Set environment variables
Make sure you have Direnv installed for this to work.

```bash
cp .envrc.example .envrc
```

Edit the `SECRET_KEY_BASE` to a stable value, which you can generate using `mix phx.gen.secret`. Here's a handy script

```bash
sed 's@SECRET_KEY_BASE=.*@SECRET_KEY_BASE='"$(mix phx.gen.secret)"'@' .envrc
```

Check that it changed, and then enable it with:

```bash
direnv allow
```

### Build the Production Release

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod mix release --overwrite
```

### Build Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t neptune .
```

### Run in Docker Container

This command will pass env vars from the terminal session to the container and will run it in daemon mode

```bash
docker run --rm -d -p $PORT:$PORT -e PORT -e SECRET_KEY_BASE -e DATABASE_URL --name neptune neptune
```

You should now be able to visit the server in your browser on http://localhost:4000

### Stop Docker Container

```bash
docker stop neptune
```

## Run more nodes

Make sure the `.hosts.erlang` file has the right hostname for your machine.

Get the hostname this way:

```bash
hostname
```

Run in two different terminals:

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod PORT=4000 iex --sname node4000 -S mix phx.server
```

```bash
MIX_ENV=prod PORT=4001 iex --sname node4001 -S mix phx.server
```

The nodes should automatically connect via libcluster :sparkles:

# Kubernetes
This app can be run locally using Minikube

## Setup
First set up the cluster:

```bash
minikube start -p neptune-mk -n 2
```

(this will create a 2 node cluster)

## Secrets
You will need to create a secrets file

```bash
kubectl create secret generic neptune-secret
```

And then edit it to include a few secrets:

```bash
kubectl edit secrets neptune-secret
```

It should look something like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  database_password: <base64 encoded password>
  database_url: <base64 encoded database url e.g. ecto://postgres:mysecretpassword@postgres-service/neptune_prod>
  secret_key_base: <base64 encoded generated secret e.g. from mix phx.gen.secret>
kind: Secret
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2022-06-17T04:08:33Z"
  name: neptune-secret
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: "27981"
  uid: b9d65217-4fa0-42a7-b230-b611de14ad10
type: Opaque
```

## Applying configurations

```bash
kubectl apply -f k8s
```

This should create all necessary pods and services

## Accessing the tunnel
To access the cluster you can use

```bash
minikube tunnel
```

Then to find the IP address of the cluster:

```bash
kubectl get pods -o wide
```

And look for the external IP of the neptune-service, which you can plug into your browser e.g. `http://10.106.243.99:4000`

## Connecting to Postgres DB

First list the pods to find the Cluster IP of the postgres service

```bash
kubectl get pods
```

```
NAME               TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)          AGE
kubernetes         ClusterIP      10.96.0.1        <none>        443/TCP          27d
neptune-headless   ClusterIP      None             <none>        <none>           6s
neptune-service    LoadBalancer   10.99.44.84      10.99.44.84   4000:31793/TCP   6s
postgres-service   ClusterIP      10.110.129.226   <none>        5432/TCP         5s
```

Then use that IP to connect to the database via psql

```bash
psql -U postgres -h 10.110.129.226
```


# Deployment

## Semi-Auto

This project uses Pulumi to deploy the K8s cluster to DigitalOcean.

First install Pulumi on your machine, then cd into the `infra` directory and set all the required secrets for the stack (dev):

```bash
pulumi config set --secret digitalocean:token <DO_API_TOKEN>
pulumi config set domain example.com # make sure you have the nameservers pointed at digitalocean since this is how we manage the DNS
pulumi config set subdomain k8s # can be anything
pulumi config set --secret database_password <pass>
pulumi config set --secret database_url 'ecto://<user>:<pass>@postgres-service/neptune_prod'
pulumi config set --secret secret_key_base '<generate via mix phx.gen.secret>'
```

Then run

```bash
pulumi up
```

## Full Auto (Continuous Deployment + Preview Envs)

### Preview Envs

Every PR gets its own preview environment on an entirely separate cluster, which
is deployed to dedicated subdomain. This allows testing changes in isolation and
significantly streamlines the steps a developer has to make to get from code change to UAT and subsequently to production.

The subdomain is generated based on the branch name using
[codenamize.js](https://github.com/stemail23/codenamize-js). This allows using
any branch name including names that are not subdomain friendly such as
`feature/do-a-thing`.

The generated subdomain will look something like this
`http://vengeful-professor.console.lol`

### Production Deploy
Coming soon...!

# TODO
This project achieved its main goal of demonstrating how to create Preview Envs
for PRs such as the ones popularized by Heroku, Render, Netlify, Vercel etc... But do it with Kubernetes as part of the CI/CD workflow.

I intend to continue to iterate on this and make it a template for future
projects requiring hand rolled infrastructure (e.g. massive scale). Also this
serves as a great learning opportunity for Elixir clustering and work
distribution/state sharing in a cluster.

There are a few more optimizations I am still working on
## Must Have
- [ ] Production deploy to canonical domain console.lol
  - Currently production deploys are not automated via CD (but can be deployed
    from the commandline using Pulumi)
- [ ] automatic SSL cert for the load balancer (via Digital Ocean annotations on the k8s config)
  - https://docs.digitalocean.com/products/kubernetes/how-to/configure-load-balancers/

## Optimizations (Nice to have)
- [ ] Single staging cluster with namespaces for preview envs
  - Potentially save money (since each 2 node cluster is ~$24, not including
    load balancer and volumes)
  - Potentially speed up initial deploy time
  - Could be a rabbit hole though
- [ ] Use labels to trigger build on PRs (e.g. Deploy label)
  - [ ] label removal should destroy the environment
- [ ] Change the destroy env workflow to be triggered only by closed PRs (with
      the labels)
  - To avoid workflow failures when non PR branches are closed
- [ ] separate secrets for production and staging (perhaps use a stack file as a
      template so there's less to define and use the "copy from" flag when running
      `pulumi stack create`)
- [ ] break Pulumi file into smaller files
- [ ] attempt to re-use k8s yaml folder
  - [ ] will require passing the docker image tag as a variable
- [ ] automatically delete volumes for preview environments
  - the volumes are created by the stateful set automatically, but are not
    destroyed when the environment is spun down. Maybe there's a way to create
    the volume via Pulumi and attach it to the cluster — this way it will get
    deleted on destroy

## Learning opportunities
- [ ] Cluster Dynamic Supervisor with Horde
- [ ] Distributed Task Supervisor for spreading work across the cluster
